{\rtf1\ansi\deff3\adeflang1025
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Serif{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f4\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Sans{\*\falt Arial};}{\f5\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Helvetica{\*\falt Arial};}{\f6\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Droid Sans Fallback;}{\f7\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 FreeSans;}{\f8\fswiss\fprq0\fcharset128 FreeSans;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;}
{\stylesheet{\s0\snext0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057 Normal;}
{\s15\sbasedon0\snext16\sb240\sa120\keepn\dbch\af6\dbch\af7\afs28\loch\f4\fs28 Heading;}
{\s16\sbasedon0\snext16\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140 Text Body;}
{\s17\sbasedon16\snext17\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140\dbch\af8 List;}
{\s18\sbasedon0\snext18\sb120\sa120\noline\i\dbch\af8\afs24\ai\fs24 Caption;}
{\s19\sbasedon0\snext19\noline\dbch\af8 Index;}
}{\info{\creatim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}{\author Antoine Mottet}{\revtim\yr2018\mo8\dy6\hr9\min34}{\printim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}{\comment LibreOffice}{\vern67306242}}\deftab720
\viewscale100
{\*\pgdsctbl
{\pgdsc0\pgdscuse451\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn1440\pgdscnxt0 Default Style;}}
\formshade{\*\pgdscno0}\paperh15840\paperw12240\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\sectd\sbknone\sectunlocked1\pgndec\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn1440\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
{\*\ftnsep}\pgndec\pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
1}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 Hello, and thank you all for coming to this presentation. The central topic of my dissertation was the study of Constraint Satisfaction Problems.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
2}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 It is a discipline that lies at the interface of computational complexity and various areas of discrete mathematics such as model theory, logic, universal algebra, or ramsey theory. The interaction between the two sides has been fruitful in both directions. On the one hand, it is notoriously hard to obtain general results in complexity theory but the connection of CSPs with discrete mathematics has led to elegant solutions to complexity-theoretic questions that were open for decades. On the other hand, the study of CSPs has motivated questions and influenced the research in discrete mathematics, most notably in universal algebra and Ramsey theory.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
3}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 Constraint Satisfaction Problems form a class of computational decision problems of the following form. We fix a relational structure A (think of a graph, or a digraph, or a partial order) that we call the template and consider}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
the CSP of A, which is the following problem: on an input B, which is finite, we ask whether there is a homomorphism from B to A.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Instanciating A with particular structures, we obtain some well-known problems.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Perhaps one of the most famous problems is the problem of determining whether a finite graph admits a proper coloring with k colors, where k is a fixed number.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
A coloring is a function from the vertices of the graph to k colors that maps adjacent vertices to different colors. Another way of saying this is that a coloring is a homomorphism from the graph to the complete graph on k vertices, i.e., CSP(K_k) is precisely the k-coloring problem.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
A second example is the problem of determining whether a finite digraph is free of directed cycles. This is equivalent to asking whether the vertices can be numbered in a way that if there is an arc from u to v, then the number of u is less than the number of v. In other words, we are asking for a homomorphism to (Q;<). We could choose here any infinite linear order, but one can show that it is not possible to choose a finite structure A doing the job. In other words, the class of arbitrary CSPs is a proper superclass of finite-domain CSPs.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Finally, the problem of feasibility of systems of diophantine equations asks for an assignment of the variables to integer numbers in a way that a system of polynomial constraints are satisfied. Up to some coding of the input, this is asking for a homomorphism to the structure (Z;+,x,1) where + and x are seen as ternary relations.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
4 }{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Complexity theory is the theory of resources that are needed to answer questions. The relevant definitions for this talk are the following. P is the class of decision problems for which there exists a deterministic algorithm whose worst-case running time is bounded by a polynomial in the size of the input. NP is the class of problems for which there exists an algorithm running in polynomial time, where the algorithm is allowed to make guesses. We call NP-hard any problem that is at least as hard as any problem in NP.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
P is a subset of NP by definition, but the converse is not known to hold. It could a priori be the case that NP splits into two subclasses: P and the NP-hard problems (we call this a dichotomy). However, Ladner proved that this is not the case: either P=NP, or there are problems in NP that are neither in P nor NP-hard, i.e., they are \u8220\'93in the middle\u8221\'94. Ladner\u8217\'92s theorem relies on a diagonalization method: one enumerates the polynomial-time deterministic algorithms and all the possible proofs of NP-hardness. Both of these sets are countable, and one constructs a decision problem that avoids these two sets.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
In their semina}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
l}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 paper on CSPs, Feder and Vardi got the intuition that although finite-domain CSPs are very expressive, on cannot reproduce this diagonalization method and produce an NP-intermediate problem that would be a finite-domain CSP. The intuition was supported at the time by Schaefer\u8217\'92s theorem, who proved that 2-element CSPs exhibit a dichotomy, and the theorem by Hell and Nesetril achieving the same result for the CSPs of finite undirected graphs.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
The intuition of Feder and Vardi was proven to be right last year. Bulatov and Zhuk, indepently, proved that finite-domain CSPs are in P or NP-hard. I want to attract your attention on the following fact: determining the complexity of a single problem can be tricky. Bulatov and Zhuk here determined the complexity of infinitely many problems. How?}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
5}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 Instead of focussing on how the complexity of a CSP changes with the template, it is useful to consider what constructions leave the complexity invariant. It was observed by Jeavons and coauthors that adding relations to a template does not increase the complexity of the corresponding CSP, provided that this new relation can be defined in a weak fragment of first-order logic that we call \u8220\'93primitive positive\u8221\'94, and which consists of the first-order formulas that only use existential quantifications and conjunctions.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
For example, I claim that the CSP of the 5-cycle C_5 is NP-hard. To prove this, look at the binary relation that holds for pairs (x,y) that are connected by a path of length 3 in C_5. This relation is clearly definable in the primitive positive fragment, and indeed here is a definition. This relation is actually the full irreflexive relation, i.e., it is the graph K_5 whose CSP is well-known to be NP-hard.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
What this observation implies is that by closing A under primitive positive definability, one obtains an invariant of the complexity of CSP(A). Such objects are called coclones (or relational clones) and have been studied for many years. In other words, the study of CSPs is nothing more than the study of coclones.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
6}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 Let\u8217\'92s now move to an overview of the results in my dissertation. At the top of the picture, one finds the class of all CSPs. This contains, up to technicalities, every decision problem. There is a natural way of dividing this class: on the left side, there is the class of CSPs whose template is omega-categorical, and on the right side there is the class of CSPs that can \u8220\'93count\u8221\'94, in some sense.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Omega-categoricity is a model-theoretic notion that I will not define, for the reason that the class of interest in the first part of my dissertation is a proper subclass, that I will call the \u8220\'93Bodirsky-Pinsker\u8221\'94 or BP class in the rest of the talk. The BP class contains all finite structures and is a class of structures whose CSPs are all in NP. Bodirsky and Pinsker conjectured a complexity dichotomy for this class, similar to the then-conjectured dichotomy for finite-domain CSPs. In the first part of my dissertation, I present a general tractability result for the CSPs in this class, as well as proofs of the dichotomy conjecture for two natural subclasses that I call here Monotone Monadic SNP and reducts of unary structures. I will give a more detailed presentation of these results in the next part of my talk.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
The class of CSPs over non-omega-categorical templates, that I will call \u8220\'93Numeric CSPs\u8221\'94 in what follows, is wilder and there are some concrete examples of problems whose complexity is unknown. Jonsson and L\u246\'f6\u246\'f6w have proposed to study the CSPs of templates that are definable in Presburger arithmetic. This class is interesting in practice, but more than this the Jonsson-L\u246\'f6\u246\'f6w programme is meant as a challenge: obtaining a complete classification of the complexity of these CSPs has to involve new techniques and insights. In the second part of my dissertation, I present two general classifications that fit into this programme. The first result is a dichotomy for the CSP of all structures that are definable in the structure (Z;<), and the second is a dichotomy for the CSP of structures definable in (Z;+,1) and containing +. Using standard methods, this implies a complexity classification for CSPs of structures that are definable in a free abelian group of arbitrary finite rank.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
9:30}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
I will now give a more detailed account of the results, starting with the definitions relevant for the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
7}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 A homogeneous structure is a structure whose partial symmetries can be extended to global symmetries. A symmetry here is understood as an automorphism: a map from the structure to itself that preserves every relation of the structure and also the complement of every relation of the structure. A homogeneous structure is then a structure where every partial automorphism with finite domain can be extended to an automorphism of the whole structure.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Homogeneous structures are identified up to isomorphism by their set of finite substructures, that we call the Age of the structure. Classical examples of homogeneous structures are the following: the rational order is homogeneous, this is sometimes called Cantor\u8217\'92s theorem. The age of the rational order is the set of all finite linear orders.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
The Rado graph is the following graph: the domain is a countably infinite set, and the edges are decided by independent coin flips with a fair coin. One can show that there is a graph that is obtained with probability 1, and this graph is called the Rado graph. It turns out that this graph is homogeneous, and its age is the set of all finite simple undirected graphs.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Taking out the graphs containing a triangle, one obtains a set of finite graphs that happens to be the age of a homogeneous structure called the Henson graph.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
A structure is additionally called finitely bounded if one can characterize its age by forbidding finitely many substructures. All the examples that I gave are finitely bounded: for the case of the rational order, one forbids loops, unrelated vertices, and a cycle of length 3. For the Rado graph, one forbids loops and directed edges. For the Henson graph, one additionally forbids triangles. A finitely bounded homogeneous structure has the property that it can be described uniquely (up to isomorphism) by a finite amount of information: one specifies the forbidden substructures, this describes uniquely a class of finite structures which in turn described uniquely a homogeneous structure. This generalises to any structure whose relations are definable over a finitely bounded homogeneous structure, and in particular this implies that the CSP of any structure that is definable over a finitely bounded homogeneous structure is in NP.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
8}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 Before stating the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture, let me introduce clones. In universal algebra, a clone is a set of operations of finite arity on a common set, containing all the projection operations, and being closed under composition. The clone that we consider here come from relational structures in the following way. Given a relational structure A, we consider the set of its polymorphisms, which are the functions that preserve every relation of A. The preservation condition is a simple generalisation of the preservation condition for endomorphisms of a structure, and I will not state it here. Polymorphisms are often considered as higher-order symmetries of the structure, generalising automorphisms and endomorphisms. It can be easily checked that the set Pol(A) of all polymorphisms of A forms a clone, that carries additionally a topological structure coming from the topology of pointwise convergence, the base set A being considered a discrete space. }
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
The reason why clones are important for us comes from the following fact: if A is omega-categorical (and in particular if A is a reduct of a homogeneous structure), then the coclone defined by A can be characterized as the set of all relations that are invariant by all polymorphisms of A. For finite A, this fact discovered in the sixties and generalised later by Bodirsky and Nesetril to omega-categorical structures. }
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
This Galois correspondence between relational clones and clones tells us that in the omega-categorical world, the complexity of CSPs is completely encoded into the structure of polymorphism clones.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
9}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 The way complexity is encoded into clones is through the natural notion of homomorphism between clones. A map between two clones is called a homomorphism if it commutes with composition with projections. The definition immediately implies that homomorphisms preserve flat equations: for example, the image of a binary commutative operation has to be commutative, for commutativity can be stated as a \u8220\'93flat\u8221\'94 statement. Under this homomorphism preorder, there is a minimal element, namely the clone of projections on the set \{0,1\}. The clone of projections corresponds to the clone of polymorphism of the classical boolean satisfiability problem, which is NP-complete.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Barto, Opr\u353\'9aal and Pinsker proved that for omega-categorical structures, uniformly continuous homomorphisms encode complexity reductions, and in particular homomorphisms to the clone of projections encode NP-hardness proofs. This is what I will call \u8220\'93algebraic hardness\u8221\'94.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
It was conjectured by Bodirsky and Pinsker that for the structures within their class, if a CSP is not algebraically hard then it must be solvable in polynomial-time. The conjecture is now known to hold for several particular cases.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
10}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 One of the major tools that we have to approach this conjecture are so-called canonical functions. A function f is said to be canonical with respect to some background structure B if it induces a function on the orbits of B. Said differently, a function is canonical if locally, one can represent f composed with automorphisms of B as some automorphism of B composed with f. It can be checked that the subset of a clone C consisting of all the functions that are canonical with respect to the same background structure forms a subclone of C, that is, it contains the projection operations and is closed under composition. This subclone is called the canonical subclone of C.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
The interesting aspect of this is that if B is homogeneous in some language with bounded arity m, then there are only finitely many orbits of m-tuples, and a clone of canonical functions acts by definition on this finite set of orbits of m-tuples. One can then use this fact to try to lift results coming from the theory of finite clones and finite algebras. In particular, we were able to prove the following: for a Bodirsky-Pinsker structure A, if the canonical subclone of the polymorphisms of A does not have a homomorphism to the clone of projections, then the CSP of A is in P. One of the consequences is that the dichotomy conjecture holds for those structures whose polymorphisms are all canonical.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
11}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 This result also motivates the following question. Recall that if the canonical subclone has no homomorphism to the projections, then the CSP is polynomial-time tractable, and that if the full clone has a homomorphism to the projections, then the CSP is NP-hard. We therefore come naturally to the following problem: can every homomorphism from the canonical subclone to the projections be extended to a homomorphism from the full clone to the projections? Note that if true, then this is enough to prove the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Now, hoping that this problem has a positive solution is not only wishful thinking. Bodirsky, Pinsker, and Tsankov proved that if the background structure B satisfies some extra assumption, namely that of being Ramsey, then every function behaves canonically on arbitrarily large substructures of B. One can restate this by saying that every function has a \u8220\'93canonical friend\u8221\'94 that is in some way locally the same as the original function. This result was first proved in the context of Ramsey theory, and it was later reproved using the Kechris-Pestov-Todorcevic correspondence which says that B is Ramsey if and only if its automorphism group is extremely amenable. One can then define rather easily an action of Aut(B) on some compact Hausdorff space whose fixpoints correspond to canonical functions, and extreme amenability entails the existence of such fixpoints.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
So, does this give a positive answer to the homomorphism extension problem? Fix an arbitrary homomorphism xi from the canonical subclone of Pol(A) to the projections. Given a polymorphism f of A, we look at one of its canonical friends, and then map f to the same projection as its canonical friend. The problem with this naive approach is that f can have several canonical friends, and these can be mapped to different projections under xi. Therefore, this extension might not be well-defined, and one can actually find examples where this phenomenon happens. Worse, one can show that there are some Ramsey structures B for which the homomorphism extension problem has a negative answer.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
12}{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
 Despite this negative result, I wanted to investigate how far one can go with this approach. The homomorphism extension problem can be shown to have a positive answer in the following cases. When B is a unary structure, I develop in my dissertation a new technique, the so-called mashup technique, to show that the canonical friends of a given function have to satisfy some equations. These equations are preserved by the homomorphism, and force all the canonical friends of a given function to be mapped to the same projection.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
In the second case, that I will develop in the next slides, another approach had to be developped. This approach is \u8220\'93hybrid\u8221\'94, in the sense that it uses both the relational approach and the algebraic approach to solve the problem.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
In general, the following question is wide open: can we characterize the structures B (say homogeneous) such that the homomorphism extension problem has a positive answer?}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
13 }{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
MMSNP }{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
is a logic that was first discovered and investigated by Feder and Vardi in their seminal paper, in which they were motivated by the study of the class NP from the point of view of descriptive complexity. MMSNP is better understood in terms of the computational problems that it describes. }
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
As an example, consider this first problem. The input is a finite undirected graph, and one has to decide whether the vertices of the graph can be colored in red or blue in a way to avoid monochromatic triangles. This problem is NP-complete.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
As a second example, consider a similar problem where this time the input graph has to be colored in a way that none of these subgraphs appear.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs60\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs60\loch\f5
14 }{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
In general, MMSNP can be thought of as a class of coloring problems, where for each finite set of finite connected colored patterns, one has the problem of deciding whether the input can be colored in a way that none of the forbidden patterns can be homomorphically mapped to the input.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
It should be noted that the no-monochromatic-triangle example from the previous slide is an example of a problem that is NOT a finite-domain CSP. The proof is rather elegant: if A is a template such that CSP(A) is the no-mono-triangle problem, then A cannot contain a loop. Therefore it has a chromatic number. Now, it can be shown that there are triangle-free graphs with arbitrarily large chromatic number, and such graphs cannot have a homomorphism to A, despite them being colorable.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
However, Feder and Vardi and Kun have proved that every coloring problem is equivalent in a complexity-theoretic sense to a finite-domain CSP. The proof by Feder and Vardi relied on some probabilistic constructions that were later derandomized by Gabor Kun.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28

\par \pard\plain \s0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\qj\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640{\cf1\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f5
Bodirsky and Dalmau proved recently that if one allows the templates to be infinite, then the coloring problems can be seen as CSPs. Moreover, the template can be chosen to belong to the Bodirsky-Pinsker class. This proof relies on a model-theoretic construction by Cherlin, Shelah and Shi. In my dissertation, I give a proof that for these structures, the homomorphism extension problem has a positive answer. As a consequence, we obtain that the Bodirsky-Pinsker conjecture is true for all the CSPs that are coloring problems, and moreover this gives a new proof of the Feder-Vardi result that bypasses the derandomization by Kun.}
\par }